Ande-Ande Lumut

A story from East Java

Once upon a time, in East Java, there was a strong kingdom named Kahuripan led by King Airlangga. When he died, the kingdom was divided into two, for his two sons. One brother ruled the kingdom of Kediri, while the other ruled the kingdom of Jenggala.

Prince Panji Asmarabangun was the son of the king of Jenggala. Princess Dewi Sekartaji was the daughter of the king of Kediri. To unite the kingdoms once again, the prince and princess were betrothed to each other.

At last, the day of marriage came nearer. Princess Sekartaji was brought to Jenggala to marry Prince Panji Asmarabangun. However, war suddenly broke out in Jenggala. On the way, the princess was attacked by the enemy. She ran into a village in the forest and came to the house of a widow named Nyai Intan. Nyai Intan had three daughters, Kleting Abang (red), Kleting Ijo (green), and Kleting Biru (blue). She adopted Princess Sekartaji as her youngest daughter and renamed her Kleting Kuning (yellow). Princess Sekartaji did not tell her new mother that she was actually a princess.

It turned out that her three new sisters were spoiled and lazy. Everyday, they ordered Kleting Kuning to work for them. Kleting Kuning had to wash, cook, and clean house. However, grateful that Nyai Intan took her, Kleting Kuning did not complain. She did her work cheerfully while thinking of her prince for her pleasure.

One day, while washing in the river, Kleting Kuning met a stork caught in a net. She immediately rescued him. Behold, he was a magical stork!

“Thank you, beautiful girl,” said the stork.

“Ah, you can talk!” exclaimed Kleting Kuning.

“Yes, only the pure-hearted can understand me. What’s your name?” asked the stork

“I’m Kleting Kuning,” said Kleting Kuning.

“Well, Kleting Kuning, you have saved my life. I’ll be sure to repay you someday,” said the stork.

Afterwards, they became good friends. He always greeted her and comforted her whenever she came to the river.

Meanwhile, where was Prince Panji Asmarabangun? After hearing the news of the loss of his future bride, he never stopped looking for her. Soon he arrived in Dadapan village. It was separated from the village where Kleting Kuning now lived by a river. However, he did not hear of her because of her new name. He stayed in the house of a rich, kindly old woman named Mbok Randha, who took him as her own son.

A few days later, a rumor soon spread in the village where Kleting Kuning lived. A rich young man named Ande-Ande Lumut was looking for a wife. He invited every girl in the villages near him to come to his house, and he would choose one of them to be his wife. Every family who had a daughter of eligible age was stirred, including Nyai Intan’s family. Kleting Abang, Kleting Ijo, and Kleting Biru could not talk of anything else.

“They say he’s very handsome,” said Kleting Abang.

“Not to mention rich,” added Kleting Ijo.

“Oh, how I wish I could marry him!” exclaimed Kleting Biru.

“No, me!” cried Kleting Ijo.

“Me!” cried Kleting Abang.

“Girls, I shall be glad if any of you are chosen by him,” said Nyai Intan. “In any rate, you must make yourself beautiful to attract him.” She turned to Kleting Kuning. “Are you going too, Kleting Kuning?”

“No, Mother. I’m not going,” said Kleting Kuning, who could never forget her betrothed husband and dream of marrying another man.

“Anyway, she should do all the work here. Kleting Kuning, wash our clothes!” called Kleting Abang.

Kleting Kuning took the laundry basket and went to the river. There she met the stork again.

“Why do you not go to Ande-Ande Lumut’s house, Kleting Kuning?” asked the stork.

“I’m already betrothed. I don’t intend to marry another man,” said Kleting Kuning.

“Ah, but there you shall meet someone you know. Go there and take this whip with you. You will need it,” said the stork.

“Yeah, but I can’t go with my sisters. They won’t want me to go,” said Kleting Kuning.

“Waiting a little will not hurt,” said the stork.

Mbok Randha, Kleting Abang, Kleting Ijo, and Kleting Biru arrived at the river. Crossing it would be the shortest way to reach Dadapan village. However, there was no boatman and no bridge.

“How are we going to get across?” grumbled Kleting Abang.

Suddenly a giant crab appeared. The girls screamed. But then he talked in a human language.

“Hey, girls. My name is Yuyu Kangkang. If you want to get across, you can sit on my back. I’ll swim and carry you across,” said the crab.

“Oh, here’s an answer to our problem. Thanks, Yuyu Kangkang,” said Kleting Biru.

“But you must pay me,” said Yuyu Kangkang slyly.

“What is the price? Gold? We’re rich, you know,” scorned Kleting Ijo.

“No, I don’t need any gold. I want to kiss each of you,” said Yuyu Kangkang.

“What are you thinking? No, we’re not kissing a crab!” cried Kleting Abang.

“Won’t gold do?” asked Kleting Ijo.

“No kisses, no carrying across,” said Yuyu Kangkang.

At last the sisters relented and let Yuyu Kangkang kissed them, though not without complaints. Yuyu Kangkang carried them across. Not far from the river, they reached Ande-Ande Lumut’s house. They sighed at how handsome he was. However, when he talked to them, he discovered that they had been kissed by Yuyu Kangkang because they smelt of crabs.

“I will not choose a girl who has been kissed by Yuyu Kangkang,” he told them. Kleting Abang, Kleting Ijo, and Kleting Biru were very disappointed. So were all other girls who were kissed by Yuyu Kangkang to get across the river.

Not long after, Kleting Kuning also reached the shore of the river and met Yuyu Kangkang. He offered to carry her across with the same payment.

“No, I will not,” said Kleting Kuning. When Yuyu Kangkang tried to force to kiss her, she attacked him with the whip. Then she hit the river with the whip. The water ebbed. Kleting Kuning walked on the river’s bottom easily.

When Kleting Kuning reached Ande-Ande Lumut’s house, she was surprised. Ande-Ande Lumut resembled Prince Panji Asmarabangun very much. However, she was not sure it was her future husband, so she kept silent. Soon it was her turn to talk to Ande-Ande Lumut. He recognized her at once and brought her in front of the guest. 
“This is the girl I choose to be my wife,” he said.

“But she’s a dirty, poor girl!” exclaimed her adopted sisters.

“She is actually Princess Dewi Sekartaji, my betrothed wife,” said Ande-Ande Lumut. “And I’m actually Prince Panji Asmarabangun. Come, Princess, show them who you really are.”

With the magic whip, Kleting Kuning transformed her simple clothes to a beautiful dress. The guests were awed by her appearance. Mbok Randha and her daughters were ashamed because they had not treated her well. They apologized to Kleting Kuning, who graciously accepted.

Ande-Ande Lumut brought Kleting Kuning to the palace, inviting Mbok Randha to live with them as well. Then Prince Panji Asmarabangun and Princess Dewi Sekartaji were married, thus uniting the Kingdom of Jenggala and the Kingdom of Kediri once again. The lovers lived happily ever after.

