Bawang Merah and Bawang Putih

A story from Riau

In a small village in Riau, there lived a wealthy merchant and his beautiful wife. They had a daughter named Bawang Putih (garlic). For a time, they led blissful lives. However, one day the wife fell ill and died soon after. Bawang Putih was grieved by her mother’s death. Unable to see his daughter suffering, he married again. His second wife was also a beautiful woman, a widow with one child named Bawang Merah (shallot). The merchant was glad to have Bawang Merah for Bawang Putih’s playmate.

Unfortunately, a few years later, the merchant also fell ill and died. Bawang Putih was left with her stepmother and stepsister. Soon, the stepmother and stepsister’s real characters showed up. The stepmother was a harsh, demanding woman, who only spoiled her own daughter. Bawang Merah was a vain, flirtatious girl, who only thought of lovely dresses and make-ups. They insisted that Bawang Putih do all the work.

At first, Bawang Putih was dejected, but then she maintained a cheerful and hopeful attitude. She believed that one day everything would change for her if she kept being kind. She grew into a bright, beautiful girl, even prettier than Bawang Merah. Her stepmother and stepsister envied her greatly. They made her suffer even more, giving her a lot of chores to do from dawn to dusk. Bawang Putih’s only refuge was the forest near the river. When she washed the clothes in the river, it was the time she was free from their torment.

One day, while she was washing clothes, the strong currents of the river drifted a red scarf that belonged to Bawang Merah. Afraid that Bawang Merah would scold her, she ran along the river with a stick to retrieve the scarf. However, the water flowed too fast. The red scarf was out of her sight.

The river ended in a cave. Bawang Putih went inside and found an old woman there.

“Hello there, young girl. Who are you and what are you doing here?” the old woman greeted her.

“I’m Bawang Putih, madam. I’m looking for my sister’s red scarf. It was drifted by the river. Have you seen it?” said Bawang Putih.

“Yes, I have. I’m going to give it to you, but you must help me do some chores first,” said the old woman.

“Most willingly, madam,” answered Bawang Putih.

Bawang Putih helped the old woman cleaned the cave and cooked some food. The old woman was satisfied by Bawang Putih’s work.

“Thank you, Bawang Putih. Here’s your sister’s scarf. Also, because you’ve helped me, I will give you a present,” said the old woman. She presented two boxes, one large and the other small.

“Ah, no need, madam,” said Bawang Putih. “You’ve helped me as well, so you don’t have to give me a present.”

“But I insist, child,” said the old woman.

Bawang Putih was not greedy, so she chose the small box. After thanking the old woman, she went home. Bawang Merah and her mother scolded her because she was late.

“Where have you been? We were waiting for you. Cook for us, we’re hungry!” said the stepmother.

“I was chasing your scarf, Bawang Merah. It was drifted by the river,” replied Bawang Putih.

“What is that box in your hands? Give it to me! I want to see it,” said Bawang Merah.

When Bawang Putih opened it, they discovered lots of jewels and gold coins inside. Bawang Putih told them how she got the box. They scolded her again because she did not take the large box.

“I will take the large box and become richer than you,” laughed Bawang Merah.

The next day, Bawang Merah purposefully drifted her red scarf and went to the old woman’s cave. The old woman asked her to help cleaning the cave, but Bawang Merah refused. Instead, she poked around the cave and found the large box.

“I’ll take this, old woman!” cried Bawang Merah, running with the box.

When she went home, she and her mother opened the large box. How surprised they were! It was full of scorpions, worms, and snakes. Bitten by the snakes and scorpions, they cried in pain. The good-hearted Bawang Putih helped them.

“But this house will belong to me, and the jewelry, and you will never order me to do housework again,” said Bawang Putih.

Bawang Merah and her mother realized their mistakes. They promised never to torment Bawang Putih any more. With her treasure, Bawang Putih became a rich young woman. Because she was clever and hardworking, she lived prosperously ever after.