The Crocodile Pirate

A story from Lampung

Tulang Bawang River was known as a dangerous place. Sometimes people who washed clothes or took a bath in that river would disappear and never return. However, people who lived in a nearby village still used the river because it was the nearest river. They warned each other not to go to the river alone. 

One day, a beautiful girl named Aminah washed her clothes in the river. She used to wash with her friends, but this time she went to the river alone. She was unaware of a pair of piercing dark eyes staring at her behind the bush. Suddenly, a huge crocodile appeared in front of her. Aminah was so frightened that she fainted. 

In the evening, Aminah woke up. She looked around. She was in a rock cave. Dimly she could see mountains of gold and treasure beside her. 

"Where am I? Father, Mother, where are you?" she asked. 

"Don't be afraid, beautiful girl," said a deep male voice. The same huge crocodile crept into Aminah's sight. "It was I who took you here."

"Who are you?" cried Aminah. "Why do you look like a crocodile but speak like a human?"

"My name is Somad. I was once a human like you. I was a pirate in Tulang Bawang. I used to steal gold and money from any ship that passed the river. Because of my evil behavior, I was cursed into a crocodile. When the full moon comes, I will turn into a human again," explained the crocodile.

"How do you survive to live? Where do you get food?" asked Aminah.

"I built a tunnel that connect this cave to a village near Tulang Bawang River. When I turn into human, I go to the village and trade some gold for food. Nobody knows that I am a cursed human," answered the crocodile. 

"Why did you only kidnap me? Why didn't you kill me as well?"

"Because I like you. You are a gentle and beautiful girl," said the crocodile. "What is your name, beautiful girl?"

"Aminah. I live in the village near the river," said Aminah. 

"I am lonely. I want you to stay in this cave and accompany me."

"I can't. My parents will look for me."

"If you stay, I will give you some of my treasure. But if you refuse, I will kill you."

Aminah thought to save her life. She agreed to stay with the crocodile, who kept his promise. He gave Aminah costly clothes and jewelry. The crocodile began to trust her so much that one day he slept in the cave and left the door open. 

"It's time to escape," thought Aminah. 

Still wearing her expensive clothes and jewelry, Aminah looked around. At last, she found the tunnel that connected the cave to the village. When she was sure the crocodile could not hear her, she ran and did not stop until she arrived at a village near Tulang Bawang River. She met the village chief.

"Who are you?" asked the chief.

"My name is Aminah, sir. I got lost from my village. Would you take me home to my parents?"

Thus, Aminah safely returned home to her parents. To thank the chief, she gave some of her jewelry to him. Then she told her parents and her neighbors about the story of the Crocodile Pirate. From that time on, the villagers were even more careful when they went to Tulang Bawang River. 

Trivia:
- River Tulang Bawang (tulang = "bone", bawang = "onion") is an actual river in Lampung Province. It is known for its fierce crocodiles. 
- In February 2013, a victim was attacked by a crocodile to death.

Source:
http://ceritarakyatnusantara.com/id/folklore/92-buaya-perompak#
http://dongengceritarakyat.com/kumpulan-cerita-rakyat-lampung-terpopuler/
http://itsfadilla.blogspot.co.id/2012/04/buayaperompak-alkisah-sungai-tulang.html
http://nasional.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/daerah/13/02/27/miu54j-korban-buaya-di-tulangbawang-ditemukan-tewas