The Three Siblings: The Origin of Bukit Kancah

A story from Jambi

Darkness covered the wild forest of Tanjung as sun went down. It was twilight when the eldest brother started to light up fire. The second brother cooked their dinner while the youngest sister prepared the dishes and drinks. They had no parents, but they grew up to be poised, independent, and clever people. Because they lived deep in the forest, they hardly interacted with another people other than their own family. 

Rumors said that they befriended with mystical beings, so the three siblings learned supernatural powers from them. It was true that they mastered magics and such that villagers marveled at their power. Despite their powers, the three siblings were kind and helpful. 

"Dinner's ready," said the second brother.

Soon the family gathered around the fire and ate. 

"Guys, have you heard that our country is attacked by our neighbor?" the oldest said.

"No, I haven't heard of that," answered the second.

"Oh, I do really wish that our country is safe and sound," said the youngest. "Whatever are the people thinking of? What is a war for?"

The king who had heard of the magic siblings intended to have them join his army and defend Tanjung. He sent his messenger to bring the oldest and the second brother to the castle before full moon arrived. 

The brothers took the king's request into consideration. "We cannot leave youngest sister alone," said the second. 

"I'll be fine, brother. There's nothing to worry about. We've always done things by ourselves, right?" said the youngest. "It is such an honor to defend our country and to bring peace back to us."

But the brothers doubted that their sister will be alright. "There are wild beasts roaming around this forest," said the eldest. "And evil mystical creatures... and who knows robbers, evil wizards, or..."

"Brother, I'm not such a weakling!" the sister protested. 

Because the brothers could not be convinced to leave her alone, the three siblings discussed to find the best way to keep her safe until they returned from the war. 

"What if we put you, sister, in a giant crock. Then, big brother read a spell to make you invisible so no creatures can see you," suggested the second brother.

"Great idea, brother," said the oldest. "Oh well, before tomorrow we go to the castle, let's do it. What do you think sister?"

"Okay," the sister agreed. After all, being invisible seemed interesting. "But promise me one thing. You two must stay safe."

"And you too," said the brothers.

Morning came. The three siblings hugged each other sadly and tearfully because soon they would be separated for the first time in their lives. Then the second brother took a giant crock, and the youngest jumped into it. The eldest covered the crock and casted a spell to make the sister invisible. After he was done casting a spell, the ceramic pot including the sister was gone out of sight. 

"Dearest sister, now you are safe for no one can see you. Your brother and I will return to you as soon as possible," said the eldest.

With heavy heart, the brothers left their sister and headed to the castle, ready to fight the enemy. The king appointed them to be commander-in-chiefs. With their supernatural power and the help of magical beings of the forest, Tanjung won. 

The king was satisfied with their performance that he promoted them as the kingdom military general officer. Other senior generals were jealous of them that they conspired to overthrow the two brothers. They joined forces with the enemy to destroy Tanjung.

The king of Tanjung commanded the brothers to fight against the traitors, but they hesitated. How could they attack their old colleagues? The king persuaded them to combat the rebellion quickly. In the battlefield, the eldest brother was slain by his own friend. He could not use his magical power when in doubt of fighting his own friends. 

The second brother was devastated of his death. With all his might, he claimed victory over the betrayers and enemy states. 

For gratitude, the king offered his beautiful daughter to marry the second brother. He hoped that the second brother would become his successor to reign in Tanjung. 

The second brother remembered his sister. He asked the king for permission to visit his hometown before he decided to marry the princess. 

As he arrived at his cottage in the forest, he shouted his sister's name. Twice. Thrice. Hundreds. Finally, he could hear a faint answer. 

"Brother, here I am," the sweet, familiar voice replied.

The second brother cried in joy. He hugged the giant pot for finally he could meet his sister again. But alas! he realized he could not cast a spell to make her into human again because it was the eldest brother who have transformed her. He could not see her anymore but only hear her voice. 

He wept. "Our oldest brother has died in a battlefield," he told his sister. He explained a long story to her. He attempted to find a way to break the spell. For more than two months, the siblings talked and talked with each other. 

"I cannot let you like this. I will find a help in the castle. Who knows if there is someone who can make you visible again," said the second brother. 

On the way to the casle, the second brother dreamed of encountering his oldest brother. In his dream, the oldest brother said that they needed three white oxens to free their sister from the spell. 

"Before I marry your princess, I want three white oxens, please," the second brother pleaded the king.

Unfortunately, the king and his subordinates could not find white oxens. 

The second brother returned to the forest to see his sister again.  His heart was full of grieves and mourn when he discovered that the pot gradually faded into mist. The crock became larger and larger until it became a hill with trees and plants. There was no longer the sound of the youngest sister's weep but the sound of gurgling water, streaming down from the brook on top of the hill. Years and years passed and the hill was named Crock Hill or Bukit Kancah because it originated from the youngest sister's crock (kancah). 