The Origin of the Cendrawasih

A story from West Papua

Long time ago, in the mountains of Fakfak, West Papua, there was an old woman who lived alone with her female dog. One day they went looking for food in the forest near their house. They had walked quite far into the forest, but they had not found any edible plants. 

The dog stopped in front of a tree that produced red fruits. Following her dog, the woman stopped as well. She wondered if the fruit was good to eat. As if the dog understood her mistress' thought, the dog ate a red fruit. Suddenly, the dog's belly swelled as if she was pregnant. Amazingly, not long after, the dog bore puppies. 

"Wow!" exclaimed the old woman. "If I eat the red fruit, maybe I can have a child too." 

She picked a red fruit and ate it. The same happened to her. Her belly enlarged. The old woman hastened home and soon bore a healthy baby boy. She named her son Kweiya. 

Years passed. Kweiya grew into a handsome, dutiful boy. Everyday he chopped trees for wood. However, because he used a blunt stone axe, Kweiya could only hew down one tree each day. Meanwhile, his mother burned the leaves of the fallen trees.

The smoke from the burning leaves caught the attention of an old man who fished in the nearby river. He wondered where it came from and resolved to find out. Following the smoke, the old man saw Kweiya chopping a tree with difficulty. 

"Hello, boy. It seems that you are having a hard time cutting that tree," said the old man. 

"Hello, sir. Yes, it is hard to cut a tree. I can only make a small notch at a time," replied Kweiya.

"That is because you are using a blunt stone axe. You should use an iron axe."

"I don't have an iron axe, sir."

The old man pitied Kweiya. He lent him his iron axe and helped sharpened his stone axe. Kweiya tried the iron axe gladly. Now he could chop trees more easily and more quickly. His mother, who was resting near the house, noticed that more trees were hewn. She rose to see how Kweiya could work faster, but suddenly Kweiya was in front of her.

"Mother!"

"Kweiya, how did you cut trees so much faster than before?" asked his mother.

Kweiya wanted to keep the coming of the old man a secret, so he lied. "I am feeling strong and happy today, Mother. Accordingly, my arms are stronger and I work faster than yesterday."

The old woman nodded. Kweiya went on, "I'm asking you to cook more delicious food, Mother. I want to have a feast today."

His mother agreed. Kweiya returned to the forest to continue his work. When his work was finished, he invited the old man to his house. His mother was surprised to see the old man. 

"Mother, I lied. I did not feel stronger today. This man helped me cut trees faster. He told me how to sharpen my axe, and he lent me his iron axe," said Kweiya. "I beg you to marry him and be happy, Mother."

His mother agreed. They married, and a few years later their small family grew with the addition of two more sons and a daughter. The old man and old woman treated Kweiya as their first child. 

However, Kweiya's half-brothers hated him because they felt their mother loved Kweiya best. Whenever their mother and father were away from home, they would fight him and punch him until he was wounded. Kweiya did not want to retaliate, so he hid in the barn and locked the door. Inside, he spun threads to make wings so that he could fly whenever his half-brothers bullied him.

When the old woman returned home, she was confused because she did not see Kweiya. She called him but there was no answer. Her sons dared not look at her. Her daughter, the youngest child, told her about her brothers' fight with Kweiya and that Kweiya hid in the barn. 

The old woman rushed to the barn. 

"Kweiya! Kweiya! Are you all right, my son?" she called.

How shocked and sad she was when it was not Kweiya's voiced that replied, but the voice of an animal. "Eek, eek, eek, eek!"

The old woman sobbed. "I'm so sorry, Kweiya. I should have protected you! Please, open the door."

The door opened. A beautiful bird with a long, yellow tail and colorful plumage came out. He gestured that there was an extra wing in the corner of the barn. The old woman took it and turned into a female bird. They perched on a tree nearby the house before flying into the forest.

The old man was very angry at his sons. The boys were so frightened that their mother and half-brother turned into birds that they blamed each other and threw ashes to one another. Suddenly, they turned into birds as well, one with red feathers, the other with gray and black feathers. They flew into the forest, following their mother and half-brother, as if to apologize for what they had done. 