The Origin of Lake Toba

A story from North Sumatra

Long time ago, Lake Toba didn’t exist. In that place was a luxurious, fertile lands. There lived a hardworking farmer. Everyday he worked in his field from sunrise to sunset.

One day, the farmer went fishing in the river. He waited for a long time, but he didn’t get any fish. Finally, he felt his bait being pulled by a heavy fish. With all his strength, he pulled his fishing rod. He found a golden fish which shone and hurt his eyes. While the farmer was looking at it, the fish spoke.

“Please, good farmer, don’t hurt me,” it said.

“Who are you? Why do you speak?” asked the surprised farmer. Unconsciously he dropped the fish to the ground. Amazingly, the fish turned into a very beautiful woman.

“I was a princess. I was cursed into a fish by a god. Thanks to you, the curse is now gone,” answered the woman. “I am willing to be your wife, as long as you don’t mention my past as a fish.”

The farmer was very happy. They married. Not long after, they had a strong and handsome son. Strangely, the son ate very much. Even though he had had his meal, he still felt hungry.

One day, the farmer worked in the field. His wife cooked some food and called her son to bring the food to his father in the field. Accordingly the son went to the field.

The field was quite far from the house. On the way, the boy felt hungry. “I will eat a little of my father’s lunch,” he thought. He opened the lunch box his mother prepared for his father. Gradually, he ate all of the food. Frightened, he carried on his way to the field.

When the boy arrived in the field, the farmer opened his lunch box. He was surprised to see the food gone.

“Who ate all my lunch?” he asked his son.

“I-I did, Father. On the way I was hungry, so I ate it,” answered the boy fearfully.

“You impudent boy! You ate your father’s lunch! You son of a fish!” scolded his father.

Suddenly, a lightning flashed. The wife appeared near them crying. The place where she stood turned into water.

“My husband, I told you not to mention my past as a fish. Now both of you must go to Samosir Hill to save yourselves,” she said.

Regretfully, the farmer took his son to Samosir Hill. His wife turned back into a fish. The water kept pouring until the place turned into a lake. The lake was called Lake Toba.