Lake of Eternal Vengeance

A story from Bengkulu

Once upon a time in a village in Bengkulu, there lived a modest yet beautiful girl named Esi Marliani. Her strong, manly, and handsome neighbor, Buyung, was deeply in love with her, and she returned his feelings. They spend a lot of time together, singing a love song under cempedak trees. Once in a while, they were having fun, running and chasing each other around the trees. They swirled, twirled, and rolled over the grasses. Sometimes they even swang on the hanging roots of weeping fig. Deers, squirrels, and every forest animals were green with envy their passionate love. 

Unfortunately, Buyung's parents did not approve of his love for Esi, for they had arranged his marriage to the daughter of neighboring village chief, Upik (Lady) Leha. 

"You are worthy for a better girl," Buyung's father said to his son. 

"But none can suit me better than Esi," protested Buyung. 

"You will like Upik Leha. She comes from a good, rich family," said Buyung's father. "Our social status will improve."

"It's maybe YOUR social status, not mine. I don't care if Esi is just a village girl and not a chief's daughter. It is her whom I love," replied Buyung. His father only shook his head when Buyung left his house in anger. 

Like they usually did in the evening, Buyung met Esi in the forest while she was picking wild flowers. "Esi, I'm afraid my parents will not bless our marriage. They have arranged me to marry an unknown chief's daughter but," he said. Esi looked into his eyes, waiting for him to finish his statement. "I will not retreat. We shall run away from my parents and marry, if you will."

"Buyung!" Esi was surprised. "Where will we go after we're married? I cannot leave my parents for sure."

"Perhaps we can live farther from the village for some years before we return to your parents," answered Buyung dreamily. "Promise me no matter what we will always be together, darling."

Esi promised. 

On the day of Upik Leha's arrival to Esi's village, everyone in Esi's village admired Upik Leha's outstanding beauty, B. They agreed that she was the most charming woman ever lived. Unfaithful Buyung was also stunned. He forgot all his love for Esi and turned to Upik Leha.

When Upik Leha took a stroll in Buyung's garden, she caught a glimpse of Esi's walking on the forest - waiting for Buyung. She was displeased to find another beautiful girl near Buyung, so she asked "Buyung, who is that girl near this garden?"

"Which one? She must be some random villager harvesting forest fruits," Buyung answered lightly though his eyes and Esi's eyes met. Deep insight her heart, Esi felt so torn and betrayed. She ran into her house before tears welled in her eyes. 

Not very long before their first meeting, Buyung and Upik Leha were married. They paraded around villages. Heartbroken Esi could not stand any longer and burst into tears, crying her heart out in the forest where she and Buyung used to spend time together. Animals in the forest were also crying to see her. 

Esi was very bitter toward Buyung that she decided to seek revenge. When Buyung and Upik Leha's parade was escorted to Esi's village, an extraordinary incident happened. Esi's tears poured heavily that the village was flooded, drowning Buyung and Upik Leha as well as their paraders and villagers. As part of Esi's vengeance, Buyung and Upik were transformed into two snakes while Esi hardily stood on them, left foot over Upik Leha and right foot over Buyung.

Esi's flood of tears became the well-known "Lake of Eternal Vengeance" ("Danau Dendam Tak Sudah"). 

Trivia:
- Danau Dendam Tak Sudah is a tourist attraction in Belitung.
- Many endemic plants and flowers grow around the lake. One is Papilionanthe hookeriana orchid. 