Jaka Tarub and Nawang Wulan

A story from Central Java

Long time ago, there lived a strong and handsome young man called Jaka Tarub. He lived in a village near the forest. Jaka Tarub was skilled in hunting. He often went into the forest to hunt.

One day, when Jaka Tarub was in the forest, he heard the sound of girls’ laughter and splashing water. Slowly, he came nearer to the sound. There was a lake nearby. Seven beautiful girls were playing in the lake. Not far away, Jaka Tarub saw a soft, lovely-colored shawl. He took the shawl and hid it.

Suddenly, Jaka Tarub shook a tree branch. The leaves rustled. The girls heard the sound and were alarmed. They took their shawls that were laid near the lake. One of the girls sobbed because she could not find her shawl.

“Sisters, my shawl is missing!” she cried.

The six other girls helped her find the shawl, but they did not succeed. Dusk had fallen. “We are sorry, but it is getting dark. We must go back home,” they said. “Nawang Wulan, you must look for it alone. We will wait for you in kahyangan*.”

Jaka Tarub realized that the seven girls were fairies. He approached Nawang Wulan, who were still sobbing, and tried to comfort her.

“Beautiful lady, why are you crying?” he asked.

“My shawl is missing, and my sisters left me. I cannot go home to kahyangan,” answered Nawang Wulan.

“Don’t cry. Come with me. I will look after you,” said Jaka Tarub.

At first, Nawang Wulan was reluctant, but she did not have another choice. Finally she went with Jaka Tarub. Jaka Tarub took her to his home. To his neighbors, he described Nawang Wulan as a girl from a distant village.

Some time later, Jaka Tarub and Nawang Wulan were married. They had a daughter named Nawangsih. After his marriage with Nawang Wulan, Jaka Tarub’s life got better. His rice harvest was always abundant. His barn was always full of rice that never lessened, even though they ate rice everyday. Jaka Tarub was curious, but he remembered his wife’s request not to ask about her background.

One day, Nawang Wulan went to wash the clothes in the river. “I’m cooking rice. Please don’t open the pot,” she told Jaka Tarub before leaving. Alas, Jaka Tarub ignored his wife’s request. When he went to the kitchen, he opened the pot to see if the rice was cooked. He was surprised to see a single grain of rice in the pot.

When Nawang Wulan returned, she discovered what her husband had done. “Why did you open the pot? Now my power is gone, and I can’t cook rice with a single grain any more,” she scolded.

Gradually, the rice in the barn decreased. One day, Nawang Wulan wanted to cook rice. She went to the barn to get some rice. How surprised she was when she saw that her shawl was hidden at the bottom of the barn! She was very angry at her husband. She threatened to return to kahyangan.

“I’m so sorry, Nawang Wulan,” apologized Jaka Tarub. He begged his wife not to leave him. “Remember Nawangsih. She is very young and needs you still.”

“I forgive you. But I will still return to kahyangan. I will only return at certain times to care for Nawangsih,” said Nawang Wulan firmly. Then she left Jaka Tarub, who watched her sadly.