Karang Bolong (The Hollow Rock)

A story from Banten

A few centuries ago, in Banten, there was a sultanate (a kingdom led by a sultan) called Kartasura. The sultanate was prosperous, and the people lived in peace. However, the sultan’s wife was heavily ill with a strange malady. This grieved the sultan. He called the greatest physicians to heal his wife, to no avail. The sultan was so worried about his wife that he no longer ruled the sultanate well.

His counsellors advised him, “Your Majesty, you have done all you could to heal the queen. However, she is not cured. We should call for higher powers to help us. It will be better for you to meditate and seek a guidance from the gods.”

Thus, the sultan meditated for days, until he heard a mystical voice: “The cure for your wife’s malady is a flower that grows on a rock in the shore of the South Sea. Take the flower and give it to your wife, and she shall be healed.”

The sultan was relieved. He sent Adipati Surti, a brave duke and a great soldier, to fetch the flower that grew on the rock in the South Sea. Adipati Surti brought his loyal guards, Sanglar and Sanglur, and went to the South Sea.

After a few days’ travel, Adipati Surti and his guards arrived in the South Sea. The shore was full of rocks. He searched for the flower that grew on the rocks, but he could not find it. At last he meditated to receive a clue from the gods. In his meditation, he encountered a beautiful woman.

“Look no more for the flower. I can give it to you. However, you must fulfill my requirement,” she said.

“Who are you, lady?” asked Adipati Surti.

“I am the maid of Nyi Roro Kidul, the queen of the South Sea. My name is Suryawati,” said the beautiful woman.

Adipati Surti discontinued his meditation. He followed Suryawati to one of the rocks. Unlike the others, this rock was hollow in the middle. They entered into the hollow of the rock and found the “flower of the rock”.

“It is a swallow’s nest!” exclaimed Adipati Surti.

“Yes, the cure for your sultan’s wife is a swallow’s nest. Take it, and give it to your sultan. It shall be cooked in a soup. Its essence will heal your queen,” said Suryawati.

“Thank you, lady. What is your requirement?” asked Adipati Surti.

“That you will come back here and marry me,” said Suryawati.

Adipati Surti looked at her deeply. “Yes, I will return and marry you,” he promised.

Then Adipati Surti took the swallow’s nest and gave it to the sultan. The sultan had it cooked into a soup and gave the soup to his wife. Slowly, her eyes opened, and her pale cheeks grew rosy again.

“My wife is healed! How can I ever thank you, Adipati Surti?” said the sultan.

“Serving you has been my pleasure, Your Majesty. But I ask you to let me return to the South Sea. I have to fulfill a promise to a lady who helps me find this swallow’s nest,” answered Adipati Surti.

With a heavy heart, the sultan let his best soldier go. Adipati Surti returned to the South Sea and found Suryawati waiting for him with a smile. They married and lived in a little house in the shore. The place was now named “Karang Bolong”, which means “a hollow rock”.

Word that swallow’s nest could cure many illnesses soon spread throughout the sultanate. Adipati Surti and Suryawati sold the swallow’s nest to people who went there to find it. As more and more people came to Karang Bolong for the swallow’s nest, Adipati Surti and Suryawati became rich.