Kebo Iwa

A story from Bali

A long time ago in Bali, there lived a wealthy couple. They had been married for a long time but they were childless. They prayed to God to give them a child, and their prayer was answered. The wife gave birth to a big, healthy baby boy. They named him Kebo Iwa, which meant "buffalo uncle". Strangely, the baby could already eat food for adults. His parents fed him with rice, meat, and vegetables. 

As Kebo Iwa grew up, his appetite also increased. In time, his parents' riches were used up to feed him. Now penniless, Kebo Iwa's parents begged the villagers to feed Kebo Iwa. 

Years passed. Kebo Iwa became a huge, strong young man. He could dig a well with his large fists. When he walked, he took large steps. The villagers continued to feed him. In gratitude, Kebo Iwa guarded the village from bandits. With his enormous body, he could easily defeat anyone who challenged him. The villagers were fond of Kebo Iwa because he was a kind-hearted and strong young man. 

The news of Kebo Iwa's strength reached the ears of the King of Bali. All this time, Bali was threatened by the kingdom of Majapahit under Patih (vicegerent) Gajah Mada. In his famous Palapa Oath (Sumpah Palapa), Gajah Mada swore to conquer all islands of Nusantara (Indonesia), including Bali.

"Perhaps this young man is the answer to our prayers," thought the king. 

The king invited Kebo Iwa to the palace and told him about the problem that the kingdom was facing. Then he learned about Kebo Iwa's skills and promoted him to be a vicegerent (patih). Kebo Iwa was delighted. 

"I promise, as long as I live, I will not let Bali be conquered by another kingdom," he said. 

Kebo Iwa was true to his words. Since he became a vicegerent, he would always defeat anyone who attacked Bali. Soon, Patih Gajah Mada from Majapahit heard of Kebo Iwa's greatness. Gajah Mada realized that he would lose if he attacked Bali. Therefore, he proposed peace between Bali and Majapahit. Gajah Mada invited Kebo Iwa to Majapahit and promised to marry him to a beautiful princess of Majapahit. 

Accordingly, Kebo Iwa came to Java island. Gajah Mada treated him nicely and held a feast in his honor. As usual, Kebo Iwa ate a lot. Then Gajah Mada began to tell him about the condition of Majapahit. 

"We are having a drought. We lack water. I heard you are very powerful. Would you help us and build a well in a short time?" asked Gajah Mada. 

"Of course," said the unsuspecting Kebo Iwa. 

Gajah Mada led him to a vast clearing and told him to build the well there. Seeing a large number of troops surrounding him, Kebo Iwa began to mistrust Gajah Mada. However, he continued digging the well with his large punches. When Kebo Iwa was deep inside the well, Gajah Mada instructed his troops to bury him with rocks. 

"Kebo Iwa has died! Now we can conquer Bali!" exclaimed Gajah Mada.

But suddenly he heard a rumbling sound. The rocks flew upward. Kebo Iwa emerged from under the rocks. 

"No, I am not dead yet. Gajah Mada, you traitor! You will receive my revenge!" cried Kebo Iwa. 

A long battle followed. Gajah Mada and his troops fought against the mighty Kebo Iwa. In the midst of the battle, Gajah Mada shouted, "Kebo Iwa, give up! Our intention is to unite Nusantara, not to harm your kingdom! I promise we will bring advancements to your kingdom!"

Kebo Iwa stopped fighting. He realized that Gajah Mada was not lying. He whispered, "But I promised I would not let anything happen to Bali as long as I live. If I surrender, that will be forfeiting my promise. Therefore, I must die."

"What?" Gajah Mada was astonished that his enemy would give in so quickly. 

"Yes, for the good of Bali, kill me. My only weakness is limestone. Take a piece of limestone from a mountain, and smear the powder upon my forehead. I will become weak, and you can defaet me," said Kebo Iwa.

Gajah Mada, who had magical powers, took a piece of limestone from the nearest mountain, smashed it, and smeared the powder upon Kebo Iwa's forehead. True to his words, Kebo Iwa became weak. Gajah Mada defeated him easily. 

"Promise me, you will bring good to Bali," gasped Kebo Iwa before his death.

Gajah Mada promised. 

Thus fell the mightiest hero of Bali. Majapahit conquered Bali, and Gajah Mada went on to unite the islands of Nusantara. 