A Kekekow and Two Poor Girls

A story from North Sulawesi

One day on a forest in Minahasa, North Sulawesi, two little girls rested under a tree. Their mother were out working in the field. The girls were starving so much that their stomachs hurt. 

The younger girl says, “I am really hungry. We haven’t eaten anything since morning.”

“We found nothing to eat although we’ve been exploring the forest all morning. Just hold on a bit more,” said her sister.

Without their knowing, on top of the tree they were resting under, a kekekow bird listened to their sufferings. The kekekow bird wanted to feed the poor girls with ripe fruits. The girls were thrilled when plenty of fruits suddenly fell beside them. However, when they looked up to look for someone who threw them the fruits, they did not find anyone. 

“Where did all this food come from? How can fruits suddenly fall here?” wondered the little sister.

“I have no idea. We should go home to tell mom,” said the elder sister.

The girls came back to the tree with their mother. When the mother saw the abundant fruits under the tree, she was shocked but pleased. They decided to bring the fruits into their house. 

Suddenly, a bird’s voice spoke to them: “Poor girls, I pity you. Everyday I will give you fruits for you to eat.”

From that day on, the kekekow always fulfilled its promise. In dry seasons, the bird would also gave them water. Sometimes it even gave them house utensils. The girls and their mother were delighted. They were not poor any longer. They were very grateful toward the generous bird.

As the day went on, a rumor of the kekekow that gave provisions to the girls spread across the village. The villagers who envied them planned to steal the kekekow. 

Eventually, they caught it and held it in the chief’s backyard. They asked for food and goods from the bird. However, the bird did not fulfill the villagers’ wishes. It gave them dried grass instead. The villagers were so disappointed and enraged that they killed the bird. 

When the girls heard about the news, they were too late. Their dearest bird was already dead. They buried its body in their yard. Miraculously, a few days later, a fruit tree grew from the bird’s grave. It provided food for the girls and their mother so that they were never starving any more. 