The Legend of the Mermaid

A Story from Central Sulawesi

In a shore village in Central Sulawesi, there lived a poor but harmonious family. The father was a diligent farmer. The mother was an excellent housekeeper. Their three children seldom fought with each other. Everyday, they ate yam and corn. 

One day, the father went fishing in the sea. He caught plenty of fish. He brought them home and gave them to his wife to cook. Since the mother was a good cook, she prepared a delicious breakfast from those fish. The children loved to eat fish very much, especially the youngest. The fish were so plentiful that there were leftovers of that day's breakfast.

"My wife, please spare me some of that fish for my dinner," said the father before he went to the field to work. "After working in the field, I will go fishing again. I didn't know the children love fish so much."

The mother put a fish and some rice inside the cupboard. Then she cleaned the table and washed the dishes while her children played happily. When it was almost noon, the youngest child became hungry. He asked his mother for food.

"Mother, I want fish and rice like breakfast," pleaded the child.

"No, son. It is for your father. Here, eat this yam," coaxed the mother. Her husband would be mad if he did not have his lunch as he wanted.

"I don't want yam, Mother. I want fish!" cried the child. 

Then he put on a tantrum and wept, rolling on the floor. The mother was at a loss. Finally she gave up and served the fish and rice for her son. Seeing their youngest brother eating fish and rice, the other children also begged their mother for the same food. In a short time, the lunch the mother kept for the father was gone. 

A little past noon, the children were all asleep. In the evening, the father came home in a bad temper. His field was devoured by wild boars, and he did not get any fish in the sea. 

"My wife, I'm so tired and hungry. Bring me my dinner," he said.

A bit afraid, the mother served yam and corn for his dinner. The father was very disappointed.

"Where is that fish, which I asked you to spare for my dinner?" demanded the father.

"I gave it to our youngest son. He asked for fish. He did not want to eat yam," explained the mother.

The father did not grow calm but became angrier. He began to scold the mother using harsh language. The mother sobbed and asked for his forgiveness, but he did not stop yelling at her. Finally the mother ran out of her house into the sea. 

The next morning, the children awoke. They looked for their mother but could not find her.

"Father, where is Mother?" they asked.

The father shrugged carelessly. "She went outside and has not come home yet."

The children went to the sea. They called their mother. "Mother! Mother! Please come home. Our youngest brother wants to suckle."

The mother rose from the sea. She held plenty of fish in her hand. She gave them to her eldest daughter. "Here, take these fish home. Cook them for your dinner," she said. Then she nursed her youngest son. 

"Mother, will you not come home?" asked her children after she finished nursing her youngest son.

"No, I still want to find fish. I will go home later."

The children went home. Their father was glad to see the fish. He ordered the eldest daughter to cook them for lunch. She cooked the fish and set the table, but they did not start eating.

"What are you waiting for? Let's eat now," said their father.

"Don't we have to wait for Mother?" said the children.

"Who cares about your mother? She didn't listen to my instruction to keep that fish for dinner. Let's eat without her," said the father.

The children was sad to hear their father saying so, but they began to eat anyway. 

In the evening, the children went to sea again and called their mother. "Mother! Mother! Please come home. Our youngest brother wants to suckle."

Their mother appeared from the sea. "Come here, children! Let me nurse my little son," she said.

The children looked hard at her. Her face stayed the same, but her body was covered with fish scales. She did not have legs, but a fish tail. The youngest son cried and refused to come to her.

"No, you are not our mother! Our mother doesn't have a fish tail," said the eldest daughter.

"Believe me, I am your mother. I have scales and a fish tail because I decide to live in the sea. I couldn't stand your father's treatment of me," explained the mother.

"We don't believe you! You must have harmed our mother and taken her form. We're going to find her," said the children. They went away, still calling their mother. 

The mother wept. Her decision caused her to lose her beloved children. Then she went back into the sea again and never returned. 

