Lutung Kasarung

A story from West Java

Long time ago, in Svargaloka, there lived a handsome and powerful god named Batara Guruminda Kahyangan. The proud and reckless Guruminda challenged Batari Sunan Ambu, the highest mother goddess in Sundanese mythology. Defeated and cursed, he was punished to spend his life in earth as a lutung (a kind of black monkey). Only when he had learned humility and earned the sincere love of a woman could he return to his god form. 

Meanwhile, on earth, specifically in West Java, in the kingdom of Pasir Batang, there lived an old king called Prabu Tapa Agung. He had two daughters. The elder was named Princess Purbararang, and the younger was named Princess Purbasari. Their beauty was almost equal, but their characters were completely different. Purbararang was cruel and selfish, while Purbasari was caring and compassionate. For this reason, Prabu Tapa Agung chose Purbasari to inherit his throne, even though the custom was to bequeath the throne to the elder child. 

When Purbararang knew her father's decision, she was irate. She complained to her fiance, Raden Indrajaya, who agreed that the king should have chosen Purbararang. 

"I want to get rid of my sister. But I don't want it to be obvious," said Purbararang. 

"I have an idea. You can give a malady to her. That will make people believe that she is cursed by the gods. That way, you will not be suspected," said Indrajaya. 

Purbararang and Indrajaya visited a witch and asked for a potion to make Purbasari sick. The witch gave them lulur (body lotion) that would give Purbasari a skin disease. Then Purbararang gave the lotion to Purbasari, lying that it was a beautifying body lotion. Purbasari applied to her skin before she went to bed.

The next day, Purbasari was panicked. "Aaaaaa!!! What happened to my skin?" Her skin was covered with small black spots. 

Prabu Tapa Agung sent the royal physician to examine her condition, but he could not determine what kind of disease it was. He sent for the oracle, who could not discover what it was either. They considered it a curse from the gods. 

"Your Highness, it must be because you changed the custom and chose the younger child to inherit the throne. The gods must be angry about this," said the oracle. 

Heavy-heartedly, Prabu Tapa Agung exiled Purbasari into the forest. She was only permitted to return to the palace when she was healed. Purbasari was miserable, ill, and confused. She was fine before she used the lotion from her sister. But she did not want to accuse Purbararang because she trusted her so much. 

Because Purbasari was very kind-hearted, the animals accompanied her. Among the animals, there was a sentient black monkey named Lutung Kasarung. He became Purbasari's best friend because he understood her language well, although he could not speak human language. Purbasari told him about what happened to her, from her father's decision to choose her as the future queen to her current illness. Lutung Kasarung felt pity for her. When she was asleep, he meditated and prayed to the gods to heal her. Suddenly, rays of light fell from the sky, forming a small pond filled with crystal-clear water. 

When Purbasari woke up the next morning, Lutung Kasarung signaled at her to follow him. He led her to the pond and gestured that she must bathe in it. 

"What is it, Lutung? Do you want me to go inside the pond?" asked Purbasari.

The black monkey nodded. Purbasari slowly dipped her body into the pond. Amazingly, the black spots on her skin vanished! Her skin was smoother than ever. She was overjoyed. She was healed. 

"I can go home!" cried Purbasari. 

The king's vicegerent, who often came to check Purbasari's condition, reported to the king that Purbasari had been cured of her strange disease. Prabu Tapa Agung was happy, but Purbararang was angry. 

Soon Purbasari arrived in the palace, accompanied by Lutung Kasarung. Purbararang was very jealous to see that Purbasari was more beautiful than before. Her skin looked as if it glowed. The disease did not leave any mark on her skin. 

"Let's have a little competition," said Purbararang spitefully. "Who has the longer hair wins!"

Both Purbasari and Purbararang took off their hairpin and let down their hair. It turned out Purbasari's hair was longer, thicker, and more shiny.

"Now, who has the more handsome fiance?" challenged Purbararang. She was sure Purbasari did not have a fiance. She pulled Raden Indrajaya to stand beside her.

Confused, Purbasari looked around. Her eyes fell on Lutung Kasarung. She took his hand and brought him in front of Purbararang and their father. 

"This is my fiance. He cured me from that skin disease," declared Purbasari.

Purbararang laughed mockingly. However, suddenly a light fell upon Lutung Kasarung. His body vanished. In his place, there was a very handsome young man, who was none other than Batara Guruminda. He bowed at Purbasari gratefully. 

"Purbasari, you broke the spell. I was cursed into a monkey by the goddess Batari Sunan Ambu because I defied her. I could only transform back into my true form when I received the true love of a woman," he explained. "Will you marry me?"

Purbasari nodded joyfully. Thus, she won the competition. She married Batara Guruminda and became queen. As for Purbararang, she was punished by Prabu Tapa Agung, but Purbasari forgave her and let her live in the palace on the condition she would never do her any harm again. 