Malin Kundang

A story from West Sumatra

Once upon a time, on the seaside village in West Sumatra lived a woman with her only child, named Malin Kundang. Since he was a baby, Malin Kundang was raised by his mother alone because his father went to sailing and never returned home.  Malin Kundang grew up well and became a smart, healthy boy and also a dutiful son.

Malin Kundang always felt sorry for his mother because she had to work hard for their sake every day, so he decided to go sailing to try his fortune. He then asked for his mother’s permission.

“Mom, please let me go sailing across the country. Yesterday, a captain invited me to join his crew.”

When his mother learned about his intention, she disagreed. She was afraid that Malin would become like his father who left them and never came back. However, because Malin pleaded to her desperately, she allowed him to go with a heavy heart.

One day, when Malin was sailing, a bad incident happened. In the ocean, his ship was intercepted by pirates. All crew were murdered. But Malin Kundang was fortunate. He survived by hiding in the ship. After the pirates left, Malin Kundang wandered in the sea until he arrived on an island he had never seen before.

Malin Kundang decided to stay there and made a living. After several years, his condition was significantly changed. His hard work was paid and now he become a successful merchant. He even married a beautiful daughter of a wealthy merchant. Malin Kundang was so contented with his current life so that he didn’t have any intention to come back home, until one day, a business matter made him go to his hometown along with his wife and other crew.

Meanwhile, after Malin left, his mother always prayed every day for her son’s good. So she was overflowing with happiness when she heard that her son was in a ship that would arrive in the pier soon. She immediately left her house, hoping to meet her son. 

When the ship has arrived and the people starting to go out, Malin Kundang’s mother could hardly believe who was in front of her. The son she was longing for so long had come back as a successful man.

Without any hesitation, she approach Malin and hold him tight. “My dearest son, how can it take you so long to come back? I’ve missed you so badly!”

“Who is that woman, Malin?” whispered his wife, who was standing behind him.

Malin Kundang was so embarrassed to tell his wife that the poor woman was actually his mother, so he pushed her aside.

Then Malin Kundang said in a very loud voice, “Who are you? I don’t know you at all. How can you pretend to be my mother?”

His mother was shocked. Malin’s words grieved her deeply. She lifted her hands and pray, “Dear God, if he is my son, I cursed him to become a stone.”

A few moments later Malin Kundang’s ship sailed back. In the quiet sea, suddenly a thunderstorm came. His huge ship was wrecked and it was too late for Malin Kundang to apologize. He was thrown by the wave out of his ship, fell on a small island, and suddenly turned into stone. 

The stone which shaped like a bowing-person an still can be seen at Pantai Air Manis, in the southern city of Padang, West Sumatra.