Prince Amat Mude

A story from Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam

A long time ago, the kingdom of Alas in Aceh Darussalam was ruled by a good and wise king. The people were peaceful and well-off. However, the king and his queen did not have any children. They were sorrowful because they did not have an heir to the throne. The king and queen prayed incessantly to God so that they could have a child. Eventually, a few years later, the queen bore a handsome son. The king named the child Amat Mude.

Unfortunately, when Amat Mude was still very young, the king passed away. Because Amat Mude was underage to be king, the king’s brother ascended the throne. Gradually, the Young King liked so much being king that he did not want to be replaced by Amat Mude. He exiled the queen and Amat Mude to the forest.

The queen and Amat Mude were forced to live in the forest. Even though they had a hard life, the queen taught good manners and morals to her son. Amat Mude grew into a handsome boy who was very devoted to his mother. He hunted game, planted crops, and went fishing to feed his mother.

One day, Amat Mude had just gone home from fishing. He and his mother sold the fish in the marketplace. Suddenly, they met a rich merchant who was a friend of the late king, Amat Mude’s father.

“Your Majesty the Queen! And you must be Your Majesty’s son. How can you be here, selling fish?” asked the merchant in surprise.

The queen told him what happened to her, from her exile by the Young King to living in the forest with her only son.

“What a pity. Let me help you. Let me buy all your fish with a good price,” said the merchant.

The merchant gave the fish he bought to his wife to be cooked. When the merchant’s wife cut the fish, she saw gold eggs in the fish’ stomach. She quickly told her husband. The merchant sold the gold eggs in town and gave the money to Amat Mude and his mother.

Thus, everyday Amat Mude went fishing. Inside the fish’s stomach he would always find the gold eggs. He sold the eggs in town. Now Amat Mude and the queen prospered. Even after he became rich, Amat Mude often helped the needy people around him. He was known as a generous young merchant.

One day, the Young King held a competition to find a cure for his sick wife. Hearing about the news, Amat Mude decided to join the competition to help his aunt. When the Young King met Amat Mude, he was astonished to find that Amat Mude was the exiled crown prince.

“You must find the cure for my sick wife. The cure is an ivory coconut in a small island accross the strait. If you fail, your punishment will be a death sentence,” asserted the Young King.

When she heard about this, Amat Mude’s mother was sorrowful. However, the kind-hearted Amat Mude genuinely wanted to help his uncle’s wife. Thus he sailed to the island, crossing the strait from the kingdom.

While sailing, he met a giant fish called Silenggang Raye, the Crocodile King, and a dragon. Amat Mude was frightener when he saw them. Nevertheless, Silenggang Raye soothed him.

“Don’t be afraid, Young Man. What is your name and why are you here?” asked Silenggang Raye.

“My name is Amat Mude. I want to find an ivory coconut to cure my sick aunt,” answered Amat Mude.

Hearing that, Silenggang Raye, the Crocodile King, and the Dragon bowed to honor him.

“Your father was a very wise king. He treated us well,” they explained. “We will take you to the island where the ivory coconut grows. But we can only accompany you to the shore, because the island is the realm of Princess Niwer Gading.”

“That’s fine. Thank you so much for your help,” said Amat Mude.

When they reached the shore, the Dragon gave a magic ring to Amat Mude. The ring could grant any of Amat Mude’s wishes. Amat Mude went on his journey alone. Not long after, he found the tree of the ivory coconut. The tree was extremely tall and there was only a single fruit on it.

“O magic ring, please make the coconut tree to bend toward me,” Amat Mude said to his ring. Amazingly, the tree bent toward him. Amat Mude could pick the ivory coconut easily.

Suddenly, there was a woman’s voice: “Whoever is able to pick the ivory coconut shall be my husband.”

Amat Mude turned around and saw a beautiful princess. It was Princess Niwer Gading, the ruler of the island. Amat Mude immediately fell in love with her. He invited her to come with him to the kingdom.

When Amat Mude returned to the kingdom, he gave the ivory coconut to the Young King. The fruit cured the Young King’s sick wife. Realizing Amat Mude’s kindness, the Young King regretted his harsh behavior. He apologized to Amat Mude and the queen and gave the throne to Amat Mude.

Amat Mude married Princess Niwer Gading. He ruled the kingdom of Alas wisely and lived happily for a long time.