The Legend of Seven Princesses

A story from Riau

In the kingdom of Seri Bunga Tanjung at the region of Dumai, Queen Cik Sima sovereigned. The Queen had seven beautiful princesses. The youngest was the most gorgeous with skin as smooth as slik, body as slender and curvy as willow, face as bright as moon, lips as red as pomegranate, eyebrows as thick as fig ants, and wavy long hair as black as "mayang" or palm flower. That was why she was called Mayang Mengurai.

One day, the seven princesses were taking a bath at Sarang Umai Pool. They were splashing and laughing that they did not know some men were peeking at them. Prince Empang Kuala and his guards were on their way near Sarang Umai pool. They watched the princesses behind bushes. 

Mesmerized by Mayang Mengurai's beauty, the prince murmured, "Beautiful girl in Umai Pool.... sooo beautiful in Umai. Yeah, yeah... d'umai... d'umai". He whispered "d'umai" a thousand times. 

Prince Empang Kuala secretly falls in love with Mayang Mengurai right away. He meant to marry her. He unintendedly walked toward Mayang Mengurai. 

"Ah!" cried Mayang Mengurai who was in amaze. "Who are you?"

"I... I... am a prince from Empang Kuala," the prince stammered. "I'm sorry to surprise you. I didn't mean to peek at you, but you're so beautiful that I can't help it."

Mayang Mengurai felt shy and her rosy cheeks reddened. She also thought that this stranger was very handsome too, but she did not want to admit it loud. 

"May I know your name, my lady?" the prince asked.

"My name is Mayang Mengurai. I'm the youngest of Seri Bunga Tanjung seven princesses," said Mayang Mengurai.

"I love you. I want to marry you," said the prince bluntly. He blushed hard afterward. 

"You had better meet my mother the queen first," recommended Mayang Mengurai who knew Seri Bunga Tanjung tradition of marriage so well. 

Several days later, the prince sent a messenger to ask for Princess Mayang Mengurai's hand in marriage. The messenger brought a betel leave cup as a symbol for king's grand proposal to the Kingdom of Seri Bunga Tanjung. Queen Cik Sima welcomed the messenger well, but she refused the prince's proposal. According to Seri Bunga Tanjung Kingdom's tradition, the oldest princess should be the one who got married first, not the youngest. As soon as he knew that the prince's proposal was rejected, the messenger returned to the prince. 

"Pardon me, O my great king. I do not mean to fail you. However, the Kingdom of Seri Bunga Tanjung has not agreed to accept your proposal to marry Princess Mayang Mengurai. It is in their family tradition that the oldest princess should marry first before her sisters."

The prince was enraged. He was very embarassed to be rejected. "Who cares about that old tradition of Seri Bunga Tanjung?" he mocked. The angry prince declared a war against the Kingdom of Seri Bunga Tanjung. 

A horrible war between two kingdoms near Malacca Straits could not be hindered. In the middle of the war, Queen Cik Sima escaped into the woods with her seven daughters. She hid them in an underground cave in which the earth and trees covered them. 

"Mother, what if we are starving down here?" one of the princesses asked.

"Don't worry, my dear. I've provided all the supplies you will need for 3 months. It's all that we have, but hopefully we can finish the war earlier," answered the queen, pointing at sacks of food on the carriage.

"Stay safe, girls," the queen bid her last farewell before she got ready to fight in the war again.

"You too, mother," Mayang Mengurai hugged her mother goodbye. "Good luck!"

Three months had passed, but the war still continued. In the beginning of the fourth month, Queen Cik Sima's troops were desperate and helpless. Finally, the Kingdom of Seri Bunga Tanjung was destroyed. 

"Your Highness, we are devastated. We cannot live any longer if the war is not stopped. So many innocent people are killed," one of the soldier reported.

Queen Cik Sima was very sad. "This is not what I want for our kingdom," she said. Immediately, she went to a genie who was meditating on the hill near the stream of River Umai. She asked for his help to help defend her kingdom. The genie agreed to help.

One evening, Prince Empang Kuala's troops were resting near River Umai under the mangroves. Surprisingly, thousands of mangrove fruits were falling. These fruits stabbed them. Not before midnight, Prince Empang Kuala's troops were paralyzed. 

Knowing that the prince's troops were powerless, Queen Cik Sima sent a messenger to meet Prince Empang Kuala to ask for peace. 

"Hey, what do you want?" the hurt prince asked.

"I come on behalf of Queen Cik Sima to ask you to stop this war. This war have destroyed our beautiful world and defile the coast of Seri Bunga Tanjung. The one who comes with wicked heart will be doomed but the one who comes with good heart to Seri Bunga Tanjung will be blessed," the messenger replied.

Pondering over that explanation, the prince realized his wrong deeds and felt sorry. That night he ordered his troops to return to Empang Kuala Kingdom. The war was stopped. 

The next morning, Queen Cik Sima quickly headed toward the seven princesses' hiding place in the forest. She was very surprised to find all of her daughters were dead. They died of hunger and thirst. Queen Cik Sima had forgotten that her supplies were not enough for four months. 

The queen was devastated of her daughters' death. She cried for days and days until she got sick and died. 

Reference:
https://id.wikibooks.org/wiki/Dongeng/Putri_Tujuh

Trivia:
- The legend is so real for the Riau people that there is a song lyric called "Seven Princesses" dedicated for the sacrifice of the seven princesses.
- Dumai people believe that the city of Dumai is taken from Prince Empang Kuala's repeated murmur "d'umai" when he first saw Princess Mayang Mengurai. D'umai is short form from "di Umai (in Umai)".
- A hill on River Umai headwaters is called Genie Hill or "Bukit Jin".
- The song of "Seven Princesses" are sung for physicians when they tend toward the sick. 