Queen Aji Bidara Putih

A story from East Kalimantan

Long ago, in East Kalimantan, the kingdom of Muara Kaman was ruled by a wise young queen. She liked to chew betel leaf* so that sometimes red liquid from the leaf poured down her white throat. Because of that habit, she was called Queen Aji Bidara Putih, which means white-blooded charm. She was so beautiful that tales of her beauty spread outside her kingdom. Moreover, she was virtuous, generous, and elegant too. Many neighboring kings visited her to ask for her hand in marriage. However, Queen Aji Bidara Putih still wanted to make advancement to her kingdom, so she declined their offers of marriage.

Unknown to the queen, her fame reached out even to the ears of the Prince of China. One day, a huge Jung ship docked in the harbor of Muara Kaman, accompanied by several smaller Jung ships. People marveled at the sight. They guessed that a prominent lord from a prosperous kingdom had come to trade with Muara Kaman. 

Soon, the queen's servants came to report to her. "My lady the queen, a prince of China has come to Muara Kaman. He sends his servant asking whether he may visit your palace."

"Certainly he may," replied the queen. "What an honor to receive a prince of China, the great kingdom."

The queen prepared a banquet to welcome the Chinese crew. After the banquet was ready, many Chinese envoys with splendid clothes arrived to her palace. They brought porcelain jars and vases, engraved with exquisite ornaments. 

"These are gifts to Queen Aji Bidara Putih from the Prince of China," said one of the envoys. "He would like to ask for your hand in marriage."

The envoys told the queen that the Prince of China was majestic, handsome, and generous. He was an excellent leader and a splendid warlord. The queen was impressed. She realized that her marriage with this prince would align Muara Kaman with the vast Chinese empire. 

"Our prince gives you a day to consider his proposal, Your Highness," said the envoy. "Tomorrow you shall tell him whether you accept his marriage offer or not."

The queen assented. After the banquet was over, the Chinese envoys returned to their ships. The queen called her most trusted advisor to help her decide whether she should marry the Prince of China. The advisor was almost a father to her that she called him Uncle.

"Uncle, the Prince of China sounded so wonderful. Handsome, generous, and powerful all at once," said Queen Aji Bidara Putih. "But that was what his servants described him. I want you to sneak into the prince's ship and see for yourself what the prince is like."

"Yes, Your Highness," said the advisor.

"I trust your judgment, Uncle. I know you can read a person's character from his appearance and behavior," said the queen.

At night, the advisor slipped into the largest jung ship. He saw a large cabin which, he was sure, belonged to the prince. Unfortunately, he could only glimpse the prince's shadow because the cabin was walled with wood and wallpaper. Placing himself where his shadow would not be seen, the advisor pressed his ear to the wall. 

Inside, the prince was eating his dinner with a pair of chopsticks. He drew the bowl close to his face and slurped the rice. Then he sipped the wine from his cup. The advisor, however, could only hear the voice of the prince's slurping and sipping. Suddenly, his expression changed. 

"What is that sound? It reminds me of something I heard in the forest," thought the advisor. He tried hard to remember. "Ah, yes! It was the sound of a wild boar eating! He must be a wild boar who can shapeshift into a human form! I must warn the queen!"

Panting, the advisor hardly escaped from the ship. The queen awaited him in the palace. She was confused at his panicked look. 

"What is it, Uncle?" she asked.

"My lady the queen, do not marry the prince! He is not a human! He must be a wild boar spirit that can shapeshift into a human!" exclaimed the advisor.

The queen gasped. "Uncle, are you in your right mind?"

"Yes! I heard him eating in his cabin. The sound of him eating is exactly the sound of a wild boar eating. If not a wild boar, then it is another animal," said the advisor. "He must be a mystic animal spirit that becomes a human in the day and an animal at night!"

Finally, the queen believed her advisor. "Then, I cannot marry the prince. I shall inform of my refusal to their envoys at once when they return."

The next morning, the envoys returned to the palace. Queen Aji Bidara Putih sat on her throne, looking calm yet stern. She greeted the envoys, but when they asked her about her decision, she turned her head.

"I am very grateful of your prince's affection for me," she began, "but I cannot marry him. I am sorry of what my decision may cause him." The queen then called her servants to return the prince's gifts. 

The envoys were shocked. They did not think a queen of a small kingdom like Muara Kaman would refuse a marriage proposal from the mighty Prince of China. They stammered their greetings and took the gifts back to the ship. 

The prince (who was not an animal spirit at all) was enraged when he heard of the queen's refusal. "How dare she, a queen of a puny kingdom, refuse me? Me, the prince of the greatest empire in the East!"

He took his sword and called his soldiers. "Soldiers, we attack the kingdom of Muara Kaman! Let her learn what comes of crossing the will of the mighty Prince of China."

Thus, war ensued. The Jung ships were loaded with cannons, shooting into the kingdom. Archers stood on deck, raining fire arrows into the villages. The prince was right. Muara Kaman was a tiny kingdom compared to China, and so the soldiers were fewer in number (even if the prince had not brought all of his soldiers). Many of the queen's people were killed, from soldiers to civilians. The queen was grieved. She loved her people dearly and could not stand being the cause of their deaths. 

"Please, please, if I am a descendant of mighty kings, let me win this war. Let no more people die because of me," she prayed. 

Then she chewed on a betel leaf and spat it into the sea. Suddenly, the leaf remains turned into giant centipedes. They coiled around the Jung ships, drowning them one by one. Cries of terror from the soldiers of China accompanied the roar of the storm and the waves. Then everything was quiet. 

The queen watched regretfully, exhausted. At least the war had stopped. None of her people would die any more because of it. 

Trivia: 
- It was a custom in Indonesia to chew on betel leaves (daun sirih). Betel leaves are ingredients of a traditional medicine. They can prevent and cure many diseases, such as acne, dermatitis, sore throat, body odor, and halitosis.
- Aji means charm or spell, bidara (berdarah) means blooded, and putih means white. Therefore, Aji Bidara Putih literally means white-blooded charm. 
- It was said that there were many porcelains inside the lake where the war happened. 