Roro Jonggrang

A story from Yogyakarta

A long time ago, in the island of Java, there were two kingdoms. The prosperous kingdom of Pengging was ruled by a wise king called Prabu Damar Moyo. He had a powerful, magic-wielding son, whose name was Prince Bandung Bondowoso. On the other hand, the kingdom of Boko was ruled by a cruel, man-eating giant named Prabu Boko. Although Prabu Boko had terrifying looks, his daughter Roro Jonggrang was a beautiful, human-like princess.

Due to his greedy nature, Prabu Boko aimed to conquer the kingdom of Pengging and expand his own kingdom. Helped by his trusted advisor Patih Gupolo, who was also a giant, he attacked Pengging by surprise and succeeded in killing Prabu Damar Moyo. Bandung Bondowoso retaliated the death of his father. Using his magical powers, he killed Prabu Boko in return. 

However, Patih Gupolo survived. He returned to Boko with his remaining army. There, he told Princess Roro Jonggrang about her father's death and that Bandung Bondowoso was the murderer. Greatly devastated, she mourned for her father for several days. 

Unknown to Patih Gupolo, Bandung Bondowoso brought his army to Pengging to get a revenge for their attacks. He came to the Boko palace and beheld Roro Jonggrang. Suddenly, his mission was forgotten at once. Roro Jonggrang's beauty enthralled him so much that he was determined to marry her. 

"Princess, you have conquered my heart. Marry me. I will take care of you and all of your people," said Bandung Bondowoso.

"I cannot marry my father's murderer," answered Roro Jonggrang. 

"But I insist. You forget that without your father, your people is just like a scattered brood of chicks. What protection do you have over me and my army? By marrying me, you can stop the war and save your people," threatened Bandung Bondowoso. 

Roro Jonggrang was confused. She thought for a moment. Then she spoke, "I will marry you if you fulfill my condition."

"Name it."

"Build me a well and a thousand temples in just one night."

"Very well, I'll do it," agreed Bandung Bondowoso.

He first built the well called Jalatunda. It was finished in a short time. When Bandung Bondowoso was inside the well, Roro Jonggrang asked Patih Gupolo to pile stones over him. However, with his magical powers, Bandung Bondowoso managed to get out of the well. Stil, he was very much lovestruck by the princess that he forgave her for attempting to kill him. 

Roro Jonggrang hid behind the wall of her palace. She looked on as Bandung Bondowoso meditated to call hundreds of genies. These genies helped him to build a thousand temples. When 999 temples were finished, Roro Jonggrang was shocked. She did not think Bandung Bondowoso could fulfill her condition. Therefore, she thought hard once more. 

"Genies will disappear when morning comes. How can I make it look like morning?"

Suddenly, she had an idea. Every morning, her maids always pounded rice. She called her maids and asked them to pound rice. Roro Jonggrang herself lit a fire in the east to make it look like sunrise. 

"Prince, look, it's morning! We have to go!" said the leader of the genie. 

"No, we have to finish one more temple! Wait for a moment!" called Bandung Bondowoso. 

The genies ignored him and disappeared. Then the true dawn came upon him. Its red light fell on the top of the temples. 

"You failed, didn't you?" mocked Roro Jonggrang. 

"You! I'm sure it was you who tricked the genies to disappear! Then you'll be the last temple!" exclaimed Bandung Bondowoso. 

His curse came true. Roro Jonggrang turned into a statue of stone. Thus, he fulfilled her condition but failed to marry her. 