The Origin of River Jodoh

A story from Riau Islands

Long time ago, in the island of Batam, there lived an orphan girl named Mah Bongsu. She worked as a servant for a woman named Mak Piah. Mak Piah had a daughter named Siti Mayang. Both mother and daughter were mean and lazy. They ordered Mah Bongsu to work for them all day. 

One day, Mah Bongsu went to the river to wash clothes as usual. She saw a large snake swimming in the river. Mah Bongsu was frightened. 

"Snake!" she screamed.

But the snake did not attack her. When she looked at it more closely, she noticed a wound on its back. Pity took hold on her. She rescued the snake and carried it home. She hid it in her room and tended to its wound. 

Whenever the snake changed it skin, Mah Bongsu took the old skin and burned it. Then, something magical happened! When the smoke flew to Singapore, pieces of gold would appear in Mah Bongsu's room. When the smoke flew to Lampung, stacks of colorful cloth would appear in Mah Bongsu's room. Soon, Mah Bongsu became rich, even richer than her mistress Mak Piah. However, she was generous. She distributed her wealth to her needy neighbors. They all liked her very much.

Mak Piah and Siti Mayang grew jealous of Mah Bongsu. They spread rumors that Mah Bongsu kept a genie in her house.

"Why should we be concerned, as long as Mah Bongsu is generous toward us?" said the neighbors.

Mak Piah's curiosity could no longer be contained. She sneaked into Mah Bongsu's room. There she saw a large snake whose wound almost healed. Near the bed, the snake's old skin was burned. The smoke went to the window. 

"So that is her secret! A snake. Very well, I can do the same thing," thought Mak Piah.

Mak Piah went to the forest and brought a large, poisonous snake. Then she put it into Siti Mayang's room.

"Mother, why do you put a snake in my room? I'm so scared!" said Siti Mayang. 

"It's Mah Bongsu's secret to become rich. Now we will be rich ourselves," replied Mak Piah.

That night, when Mah Bongsu was asleep, a strange thing happened. Mah Bongsu's snake spoke to her in human language. "Mah Bongsu, please take me to the river."

"What's that? Who speaks?" asked Mah Bongsu. 

"It's your snake. Please take me to the river where you first found me."

"I must be dreaming," muttered Mah Bongsu drowsily. 

She rose and brought the snake to the river. There, the snake transformed into a handsome human prince. Mah Bongsu was surprised. 

"I am actually a prince, who was cursed into a snake. I want to thank you and repay your kindness because you have saved my life," explained the prince. "Mah Bongsu, you are a diligent and generous girl. Would you marry me?"

Mah Bongsu still could not speak, but she nodded. The snake's skin turned into a grand and beautiful house. Mah Bongsu and the prince married and lived in the house happily ever after. The river where the prince proposed was called River Jodoh (jodoh means "mate"), because Mah Bongsu found her mate in that river. The village where Mah Bongsu lived was named Tiban Village (ketiban means "showered", from the phrase ketiban rezeki = "showered with fortune"). 

Meanwhile, in Mak Piah's house, the greedy woman and her husband were mourning for their daughter. The poisonous snake bit Siti Mayang, and now she was dead.


Sources: 
http://www.kumpulandongeng.com/dongeng-anak/dongeng-legenda-sungai-jodoh/
http://dongengceritarakyat.com/cerita-rakyat-bangka-belitung-terpopuler/
http://kcerita-rakyat.blogspot.co.id/2010/10/sungai-jodoh.html